# Rain on Snow notes

2024-06-17

## Attendees

* Andy
* Matt


## Discussion

* Where is the data? `/projects/AROSS/Observations/surface/version_2.0.0`
  * Ancillary data is in the `metadata/` subdir. There's one file, `stations_metadata.csv`.
    * 244 stations
    * station name, lat/lon, elevation, when it started recording, etc.
    * Country codes are in a format I hadn't seen before, e.g. `FI__ASOS`.
    * First 4 fields most important: station code, name, lat, lon.

  * "Core" data is in the `events/` subdir
    * Files indexed by station code
    * Files from 1923 - 2023, but don't need to worry about anything before 2000 (there are 1.8 million total events, so this helps us simplify, plus we don't think the data before that is useful for analysis). Andy can create a new directory for only relevant events if it would help.
    * **Use these events to populate a database.**

* The database: What do we need it for? How will we query it?
  * Will be used to plot events based on spatial & temporal queries. E.g.:
    * we have a polygon containing a set of stations and we want to plot the events that happened for those stations over a range of years.
    * For a particular station, how many events occurred in all Januaries between a start and end year.
  * Query: Spatial and temporal, by country, station name, station id.

* Who will use the database?
  * Will be open to public. User base will be mostly scientists
  * OpenAPI / GraphQL / ...
  * User: someone like Mark Serrezze who doesn't remember to code and works in Excel but still wants to do basic analysis with this dataset. Do queries, produce maps & time series plots without writing code, .

* **Based on the user profile, we need some interface!**
  * Web-based search interface. Accept uploaded shapefile/geojson/typed bbox/typed coords/drawn shape + temporal + station id + station name + country
  * Static or interactive plots of results
    * Map: Illustrate matching stations with proportional circles scaled on count of matching events. Optionally show number in circle? Or hover/click interaction to show details. 
    * Time series plot: Vertical bar chart representing counts per month (we may also support "spikes" like holoviews; would be most useful if plot is zoomable). Consider the viz details as we go forward!
  * Interactive data visualization would be great, but expensive
  * Do we want to include the rain on snow animator widget?


### Planning

_ideal_ scenario if we don't discover new requirements or gotchas lurking in the dark and things are going great:

* 1st two weeks: Load PostGIS DB with events
  * E.g. a QA DB for Andy to play with, e.g. with GeoPandas `from_postgis()` (https://geopandas.org/en/stable/docs/reference/api/geopandas.GeoDataFrame.from_postgis.html)
* 2nd two weeks (if we're really hot and don't discover new problems): Build out an API on top of the DB, go to prod with API and DB.
* 3rd two weeks (if we're really hot): Build out an interface on top of the API


#### Budget

* Start with 4 weeks. How does this account for Juneteenth and vacation?
* Budget contains another 4-6 weeks in the next 6 months.
* Andy _thinks_ this ideal scenario fits the budget.


### How we work together

* Tight coupling!
* GitHub!
* Write documentation for non-docker-experts, non-coder scientists.
* Collaborate outside & inside NSIDC


#### Naming and organization

* AROSS: This is related to AROSS
* Careful of conflict with aross-map. It's based on LEO Network, which contains observations personally experienced recorded in the media, e.g. news article about Rain on Snow.
* This project uses automated monitoring stations instead.
* `aross-stations-*`:
  * `aross-stations-project` or `aross-stations`
  * `aross-stations-db`
  * `aross-stations-api`
  * `aross-stations-ui`
* **IMPORTANT**: Each repo contains documentation about itself and its context, e.g. how it builds on top of the components under it.


## Action items

- [ ] Matt: Set up repo(s), push these notes
- [ ] Matt: Validate access to data
